the interior of British Columbia has
been home to the Shuswap nation for
almost ten thousand years in fact they
first ventured onto the land when the
glaciers receded despite many struggles
to deal with the arrival of Europeans in
the 200 years of recent history native
peoples have worked hard to preserve and
share their culture with future
generations one place where visitors can
learn more about traditional native life
is at the shoe swap nation
interpretation center at the historic
Hat Creek Ranch located just north of
cash Creek along highway 97 the ranch is
a place where visitors can discover
British Columbia's heritage from First
Nations culture to Gold Rush lifestyle
when we visited our tour guide Sandra
gasps bard
gave us a review of what visitors can
expect the shoe shop native
interpretation center is developed by
our people as a way to preserve history
and culture for the younger generations
so many of our people have developed
methods of showing how we would cook and
preserve our foods and berries meats
medicines then we move into lodgings
we were very nomadic people during the
times of the spring to the fall so we
constantly traveled our main dwelling
though other than trading and preserving
and following the food was to live in
our villages where we had our pit houses
which we referred to as coolies or
people I do you have your immediate
family living with you from grandparents
to grandchildren I mean stay there for a
six-month period of time so from there
then we would go into talking about the
turning of the highs which was the
woman's job after the men returned they
give the heights to the women we're
going to sweep the fat muscle tissue
stretch them and also smoke them over
the fire to make them into pliable
letters and then we talk about the
cleansing of the body as well as spirits
and that we use the sweat lodge which is
often referred to as Indians
thousands of years before that finns
discovered the health benefits of the
sauna the Shuswap people's were sitting
in sweat lodges it was a big part of
their culture and was seen as a place to
purify the body mind and soul through
sweating heavy lava rocks were put in
the center of the lodge and water was
poured on to create steam another way
that people would purify themselves is
with smudging or burning sage now sage
is a central and integral part of the
Shuswap culture we also use the sage for
a tea for sore throat we also use the
sage as natural mosquito repellent we
put it down in areas get rid of
negativity so in your home you could put
little little pieces of the sage in in
the corners usually because that's where
negativity gets caught and then it'll
keep the good feeling and good music is
also an important part of the Shuswap
culture in each dancer song has a
specific purpose from telling stories to
healing the dancer often wears a costume
that is integral to properly performing
events the jingle dress originally was a
vision of a medicine man who had
foreseen this dress being made now this
dress was worn and danced in by many to
send out healing so when we dance were
dancing for the people here in this
dress it's a medicine or spiritual dress
while at the site we also met native
musician John puro who shared some of
his musical philosophy with us all my
songs are very traditional about the
elders from my community my flute is my
own and I love to play this not only for
myself but for other people who enjoy it
and are going through a healing
experience in life that's why I played
this jump also for the same reasons so
that the future generations will also
get to learn the songs that I sing
food songs of the clip British Columbia
is a beautiful landscape people buy a
rich tapestry of many cultures while our
friends south of the border refer to
their society as a melting pot II
Canadians prefer to celebrate
distinctions of their peoples to
understand and appreciate native culture
there's nothing quite like getting to an
interpretive centre and seeing it
firsthand travellers making a road trip
through the caribou region should take
an afternoon off to visit Hat Creek
Ranch so that they too can experience
traditional First Nations culture in
British Columbia